## BNF

Backus-Naur Form

## the role of parser

```
                   token
source   Lexical  ------>        parse   Rest of
-------> Analyzer <------ Parser ------> Front End
program          get next token   tree


                        Symbol
                        Table
```

There are three general types of parsers for grammers: universal, top-down, bottom-up.

## context free grammer

A context-free grammer consists of terminals, nonterminals, a start symbol, and productions.

Each production consist of:

(a) a nonterminal called the head or left side of the production.

(b) the Symbol -> Sometimes ::=

(c) a body or right side consisting of zero or more teminals and nonterminals.

exp -> item + item

## devivation

E -> E + E | E * E | - E | ( E ) | id

The production E -> -E signifies that if E denotes an expression, then - E must also denote an expression.

### description

- replacement

The replacement of a single E by - E will be described by writing `E => -E`. Which is read, 'E derives -E'.

- replace any

The production E -> (E) can be applied to replace any instance of E in any string of grammer symbols by (E), eg: E * E => (E) * E or E * E => E * (E)

- sequence of replacement

E => -E => -(E) => -(id)

We called such a sequence of replacements a derivation of -(id) from E.

This derivation provides a proof that the string -(id) is one particular instance of an expression.

### definition

(i) Nonterminal A in the middle of a sequence of grammer symbols, as in αAβ.

(ii) Suppose A -> η is a production.

Then, we write αAβ => αηβ. Derive in one step.

If α1 => α2 => ... => αn, we say α1 derives αn.

\*=> : derives in zero or more steps.
(1) α \*=> α
(2) if α \*=> β, β => η, then α \*=> η

- sentential

If S \*=> α, S is the start symbol of a grammer G, we say that α is a sentential form of G.

- sentence

A sentence of a grammer is a sentential form with no nonterminals.

Then language generated by a grammer is its set of sentences. Denote L(G)

Thus, a string of terminals ω is in L(G), if and only if ω is a sentence of G (or s \*=> ω)

- context free grammer

A language that can be generated by a grammer is said to be a context-free language. If two grammers generate the same language, the grammers are said to be equivalent.

### left most derivation and right most derivation

In left most derivations, the leftmost nonterminal in each sentential is always chosen. α lm=> β.

E => -E => -(E) => -(E + E) => -(id + E) => -(id + id)

In right most derivations, the rightmost nonterminal is always chosen. α rm=> β.

E => -E => -(E) => -(E + E) => -(E + id) => -(id + id)

ωAη lm=> ωδη, w only consists of terminals, A -> δ is the production applied.

α lm\*=> β

If S lm\*=> α, then we say that α is a left-sentential form of the grammer at hand.

## parse tree

Consider any derivation α1 => α2 => ... => αn, α1 is a single nonterminal A.

BASIS: The tree for α1=A is a single node labeled A.

INDUCTION: Suppose we already have constructed a parse tree with yield αi-1 = X1X2...Xk. Suppose αi is derived from αi-1 by replacing Xj, a nonterminal, by β=Y1Y2...Ym. That is, at the ith step of the derivation, a production Xj -> β is applyed to αi-1 to derive αi=X1X2...Xj-1 β Xj+1...Xk

    To model this step of the derivation, find the jth leaf from the left in the current parse tree. This leaf is labeled Xj. Give this leaf m children, labeled Y1, Y2,...,Ym, from the left. As a special case, if m =0, then β = ε, and we give the jth leaf one child labled ε.

There is a many-to-one relationship between derivations and parse trees.

There is a one-to-one relationship between parse trees and either leftmost or rightmost derivations.

## ambiguity

A grammer that produces more than one parse tree for some sentence is said to be ambiguous.

id + id * id

E => E + E => id + E => id + E * E => id + id * E => id + id * id

E => E * E => E + E * E => id + E * E => id + id * E => id + id * id

## elimination of left recursion

A -> Aα | β

=>

A -> βA'
A' -> αA' | ε

A -> Aα1 | Aα2 | ... | Aαm | β1 | ... | Βn

=>

A -> β1A' | ... | βnA'
A' -> α1A' | ... | αmA' | ε

## FIRST

Define FIRST(α), to be the set of terminals that beging strings derived from α.

α is any string  of grammer symbols.
if α \*=> ε, then ε ∈ FIRST(α),
if α \*=> cη, then c ∈ FIRST(α)

## FOLLOW

Define follow(A), to be the set of terminals a that can appear immediately to the right of A in some sentential form.

A is a nonterminal.
Such a, exists a derivation of the form S \*=> αAaβ, for some α and β.

## bottom-up

reduction: reducing a string w to the start symbol of the grammer.

### handle

If S rm\*=> αAω rm\*=> αβω, then production A -> β in the position following α is a handle of αβω.
